[Music]
climber's get stranded on mountains with
frightening regularity lately their way
down may be blocked by avalanches
landslides or other damage to the route
so if people can't escape from
mountaintops on foot why not rescue them
with the help of helicopters after all
these machines can land anywhere right
good question but it turns out that
there's a serious reason why choppers
don't fly all the way to the top of high
mountains like Everest helicopters
simply aren't designed to rise to such
altitudes so first let's figure out how
these machines work in fact you can
describe the way helicopters fly in just
one word lift which is the force that
counteracts gravity yep it's the very
same lift that helps plane stay airborne
but while aircraft generate lift with
the help of their wings helicopters need
rotors also notice blades to perform
this impressive feat the blades push air
downward which allows the chopper to
move upward despite the force of gravity
but the lift produced by the rotors
greatly depends on the density of the
air the higher this density is the more
comfortably and safely a helicopter can
fly but once you begin to rise above sea
level air density starts to decrease
ever heard of people who couldn't
breathe at high altitudes in the
mountains as because of the lack of
oxygen in the air so returning to
Everest it's the highest peak in the
world at the top of this mountain which
reaches 29,000 30 feet the density of
air is only 1/3 of that at sea level it
means that the lift this air can provide
is also 3 times weaker than it is in
standard sea level conditions and you
should also keep in mind that a chopper
needs to support not only its
substantial weight but also the weight
of its crew passengers and cargo in
other words the air at such altitudes
isn't dense enough to hold helicopters
aloft on the other hand there are
special helicopters that can fly way
higher than regular ones they not only
have larger blades and extremely
powerful engines but there
so very light as you might guess it
costs a fortune to produce such a
chopper normally helicopters don't need
to fly higher than their usual altitude
of 10,000 feet so they aren't equipped
with such instruments at the same time
there have been several helicopters that
did make it to the peak of Everest more
than 29,000 feet above sea level the
first time it happened was in 2005 and
the pilot who controlled that chopper
mentioned later that landing was the
hardest and most dangerous part of the
trip he couldn't understand where he was
landing and whether he was going to
touch down on snow above rock or snow
above nothing also pilots who fly
high-altitude helicopters in the
mountains must constantly calculate how
much power they'll need for maneuvers
like hovering taking off and landing at
this or that altitude by the way
temperatures and air pressure also
define how safe a trip is going to be
besides pilots have to avoid landing
choppers in places where there's even
the slightest chance of a landslide or
avalanche all this requires not only
incredible experience and skills but
also a good portion of luck well I guess
that answers my question about why
helicopters and high places are
incompatible but hang on there are some
other things that confuse me about
choppers for example why do some
helicopters have wheels while others
land on the skids well almost all early
choppers had wheels just like airplanes
but since emergency landing sites were
often just plowed fields the front
wheels of helicopters used to dig in
which made a forward moving machine
highly unstable during landing on top of
that in sloping areas wheeled
helicopters sometimes rolled downhill
that's why skids soon became standard
for all smaller helicopters this way
they're able to land on soft surfaces
and in hilly areas besides skids can be
equipped with special floating devices
for landing on water and finally the
skids are super convenient for strapping
additional external loads as for moving
on the ground a chopper is either
transported on a dolly or with the help
of special ground
Wheelz but the larger a helicopter is
the more difficult it is to handle it on
the skids that's why the most massive
choppers are designed with wheels
they help large machines to taxi safely
plus they're more convenient for rolling
landings and takeoffs
have you seen more helicopters with
wheels or with skids share your
experience in the comment section below
then there's another question that's
bothering me
why do helicopters need two rotors I
know the big one overhead is the main
blade it provides the necessary lift and
produces motion but how about the tail
rotor what good does it do sitting there
at the end of the chopper well without
the tail end rotor helicopters would
just fly in circles look how it works to
get a chopper into the air the main
rotor must move and push the air down
which in turn will push the heavy
machine up but for every action there's
an equal and opposite reaction now
that's not my idea it's Newton's third
law of motion it means that if the
choppers rotor moves clockwise its
fuselage will be pushed in the opposite
counterclockwise direction that's when
the tail rotor comes into play by
rotating this nearly vertical set of
blades make sure that the helicopter
doesn't start moving in circles in the
air and remain stable during the flight
ever seen helpless chopper stuck in the
air rotating in one place they most
likely had their tail rotors damaged now
I was also wondering if helicopters
could fly in the rain it turns out that
theoretically they can the other
question is whether they're allowed to
rain alone does nothing to affect the
ability of a chopper to rise in the air
after all blades still rotate and thrust
still takes the machine upward on the
other hand rain means low visibility and
according to the rules
choppers can fly only when visibility is
good so that pilots can see where
they're going
that's why unless a mission outweighs
the risks helicopters prefer to rest in
the hangars during rainy weather okay
and how about flying at night actually
it's the same as flying in the rain
uppers can't do it but prefer not to
unlike airplanes which fly at an
altitude of several thousand feet and
have established roots choppers must
stay at much lower heights besides their
roots are more flexible as a result
helicopters avoid flying in the dark due
to the risk of hitting something which
always end badly both for the machine
and its crew and passengers also one day
I saw a cool photo where a chopper was
performing an incredible trick it was
flying upside-down it may be pretty
suspicious
was it Photoshop or what nope some
helicopters can indeed fly upside-down
but is by no means an easy feat once
again a helicopter rises into the air
thanks to the lift produced by its
powerful rotors which spin at insane
speeds more than 500 revolutions per
minute so it makes sense to suppose that
since a chopper rises in the air thanks
to its rotor spinning they could do so
even when inverted admittedly it would
be inconvenient but not unreal all
together right only in theory
unfortunately most commercial choppers
simply aren't designed to perform such
tasks in these helicopters the joint
that connects the fuselage and the
blades is too weak to handle the weight
of a belly-up machine also the blades
themselves aren't rigid enough should a
chopper turn over they'd flex come too
close to the fuselage and eventually
crash against it you can imagine the
fatal outcome of such an accident on top
of that to fly upside down the chopper
needs its engine to be redesigned
otherwise the fuel and lubricant
wouldn't be distributed inside properly
in any case most modern helicopters can
pull the barrel roll track but only for
a few seconds at a time and while being
controlled by an expert pilot by the way
nowadays choppers are so advanced that
some experts state that you're more
likely to survive in a helicopter crash
then when an airplane goes down well I
feel better hey if you learned something
new today then give the video a like and
share it with a friend and here are some
other video
I think you'll enjoy just click to the
left or right and remember stay on the
bright side of life